this is a 1996
oldsmobile silhouette and it is the
original luxury minivan it's also ugly
and weird and incredibly rare which
means i love it because i enjoy weird
cars like this the silhouette is also
almost completely forgotten in the car
world but today i'm going to review this
silhouette
and we're going to remember
[Music]
i've borrowed this silhouette from a
viewer here in san diego who has an
amazing group of 1980s and 1990s general
motors vehicles when he reached out and
asked if i wanted to review any of them
my answer was
yes
the silhouette
mostly because i'm pretty sure i'll
never be able to find another one ever
again that's because the silhouette
wasn't exactly a big success it first
went on sale in 1990 as a luxury
alternative to the other two general
motors minivans the chevy lumina apv and
the pontiac transport it was a bit of a
gamble because no one had really created
a luxury minivan before aside from a few
trim levels of the chrysler town and
country but general motors decided to
give it a shot and they boldly created
the silhouette unfortunately the
silhouette was terribly ugly and
everyone thought it looked like a dust
buster seriously the unofficial nickname
of general motors minivans from this era
is the dust buster vans because of this
crazy sloping windshield and frankly i
think it's a pretty good comparison
another problem was power when this van
first came out it had only 120
horsepower later that was increased to
160 and then 180 but still
not exactly all that strong for a
minivan another problem was quality
namely the fact that there really wasn't
any and that's one of the reasons why
it's so hard to find a silhouette today
most of these have completely fallen
apart over the years but never mind the
bad styling the weak power trains and
the poor quality i like this silhouette
because it's interesting and it's quirky
and it's weird and it's rare and i've
always wanted to check it out so today
i'm going to do just that first i'm
going to take you on a tour of this
silhouette and i'm going to show you all
of the interesting quirks and features
of the first luxury minivan then i'm
going to get it out on the road and
drive it and then i'm going to give it a
dug score
all right i'm going to start the quirks
and features of the silhouette with
getting in and that means we start with
probably my favorite silhouette feature
to explain it i turn your attention to
the key fob and you can see there are
three buttons you have lock unlock and
then a button that looks like a van and
not just any van but a perfect diagram
of the silhouette with its rather
unusual distinctive styling which is a
nice touch but anyway you press the van
button and the back door opens
automatically it's a power sliding door
now this is meaningless to modern
minivan consumers of course it has a
power sliding door but it was huge when
the silhouette came out this was the
first minivan to have a power sliding
door and it was like the future had
finally come to real life you could push
a button and open a minivan door it was
mind-blowing now it is worth noting you
didn't have to push the button in order
to open the power sliding door you could
also just pull on the door handle like
opening the door to pretty much any
minivan but then you let go and the door
automatically did the rest so you had a
power opening door either way you did it
an unbelievable feat of technology
back when this van was new but anyway
once you opened the silhouette power
door and it automatically and gracefully
opened for you you gained access to the
second row the rear seats and probably
my second favorite silhouette quirk
slash feature and that would be
the built-in child seat take a look at
this the rear seat behind the driver
opens up and there is a built-in car
seat in there for children and that
means you can just open up your seat and
strap your child in you don't have to
worry about clipping in your car seat
and lifting it into out of your
different vehicles and dealing with all
the cumbersome stuff that a car seat
involves because it was literally built
into the seat this is brilliant no
automaker is doing this anymore and i
don't understand why it seems like such
an obvious feature for a family vehicle
oldsmobile had it almost 25 years ago
now unfortunately we then get to a bit
of a demerit for the silhouette namely
the fact that even though it has this
wonderful sliding door that opens
automatically it's only on one side and
i don't mean that the power door is only
on one side i mean the door is only on
one side you can see on the other side
of this van there's nothing there at all
for some reason it wasn't until the 1996
chrysler minivan that automakers here in
north america realized hey you can put
two sliding doors in minivans what a
brilliant idea and so before that
minivans had only one sliding door on
one side it was the passenger side so
your children didn't ever have to get
out into traffic but either way it was
rather inconvenient to be able to access
the second and third row from only one
entry point this door on the passenger
side but that was standard minivan
practice until the 90s but anyway once
you've strapped your child in to the
built-in silhouette car seat you then
press the minivan button on the key fob
again and
the door closes automatically again
something modern minivan people take for
granted but it was a big deal with the
silhouette but to me the very coolest
thing about the whole silhouette power
door situation
is none of the stuff i've already showed
you instead it has to do with the noise
the door makes when it closes take a
listen
now it's not making that noise because
it's squeaking or old or broken they
engineered that noise in so that
children would be aware when the door
was closing and they wouldn't get their
fingers caught that is a safety noise
they put in the automatic door just to
make sure nobody got injured take
another listen to this bizarre
silhouette door closing noise
and next up our next interesting quirk
with the silhouette is of course its
styling the thing that gave the dust
buster general motors minivans their
dust buster nickname the weirdest part
is of course this sloping front end line
which basically starts at the furthest
front most point of the bumper and
continues all the way to the roof as one
wild angled line the entire way this
styling was certainly interesting and
rather eye-catching and i have a few
theories about why they decided to do
this one is aerodynamics i wonder if
maybe it helped them with fuel economy
styling the van this way just gave it a
couple extra miles per gallon another
theory i have is that they were
specifically intending to make something
weird and unusual you see the chrysler
minivan had come out years before the
general motors dust buster vans and the
chrysler minivan had been a huge success
general motors was playing catch-up and
i've always wondered if maybe they went
strange with the styling to try to draw
attention away from the more popular
chryslers the other thing worth noting
about the styling of this van is it
wasn't that unusual at the time period
there were other vans designed like this
the ford aerostar had a similar crazy
sloping front end and of course so did
the toyota previa but to me it was the
silhouette and the general motors dust
buster fans that had this design the
weirdest and took it to the most extreme
but regardless of the reason for the
design it's safe to say that it
alienated people customers in the early
90s who just wanted a minivan didn't
want to take on such a bizarre weird
futuristic shape for their family
vehicle and i'm sure general motors lost
sales because of this strange look of
course i'm thrilled they did it because
they created one of the quirkiest
minivans ever but the next generation
oldsmobile silhouette was just a fairly
traditional boring minivan with a far
more traditional look they abandoned the
crazy dustbuster futuristic design
concept and that's probably a good thing
because designing the van like this
created more challenges than just the
polarizing styling one challenge is
clearly seen right here and that was
engine access by pulling the windshield
so far forward it blocked easy access to
most of the engine so you can get to the
front half maybe but the back is pretty
much stuck in there and trying to work
on this van was a nightmare as a result
of that and another challenge was the
dashboard again pulling the windshield
so far out to create this
sloping line front end meant that the
dashboard continued on for like four
feet behind the steering wheel so if you
put something on the dashboard it was
easily able to roll down to the base of
the windshield where you couldn't really
reach it you'd have to basically stand
on the seat and get all the way forward
in order to get to the front of the
dashboard but to me the most hilarious
challenge that comes with this design
relates to the front doors in order to
make the front doors large enough so
that someone could comfortably get
inside they have to curve back at the
top and if you look at the line on the
front door you can see it kind of bends
backward at the top to ensure it's not
too narrow for you to get your head in
the problem with that is that the top of
the door then kind of comes to a point
and if you're not ready for it or used
to it you could hit your head and really
hurt yourself on that sharp door top
this apparently happened and it must
have happened quite a bit because
there's an actual warning label that
specifically says the door is pointy
don't hit your head on it you idiot and
they've placed it at the very top of the
door right by where you would hit your
head you can see they've even designed
the warning label to curve around this
rivet so that the label is in the most
relevant part of the door i find this to
be hilarious there were so many head
hittings because of this design and the
doors they actually had to make a bright
yellow warning label but there was more
weirdness on the outside of this van
than just the dust buster front end
here's another great one the third brake
light beginning in the 1980s the u.s
government mandated that all new cars
had to have a third center-mounted brake
light basically every car has two brake
lights on the side and the third one on
the top but not the silhouette instead
the two side brake lights are on the top
and the third brake light is in the
middle below the side brake lights this
is probably one of the only cars ever
that has the third brake light mounted
below
the two normal brake lights and next up
another interesting exterior quirk of
the silhouette would be the stripes this
van has seven black stripes that go
around the entire van the sides the rear
basically the whole thing has these
black stripes on it i guess because they
thought that without the stripes it just
looked like too much van i also like
these black vinyl decals next to the
windows on the side you can see they've
placed these here apparently to make it
look like the window is this one
continuous piece and it doesn't ever
curve up like they actually do it's
almost like they're admitting their
design wasn't that good and they're
trying to solve the problem with decals
and speaking of windows it's worth
noting that the back windows in this
minivan don't open in modern minivans
it's a foregone conclusion you can roll
down the windows in the second row of
seats but in this van there's this
little clip you just kind of push it
open and this is as far as the window
opens basically just enough to allow a
little bit of fresh air to come in it's
essentially a vent and not an actual
rolling down window again this was
pretty common in minivans in the 90s
although it's basically unthinkable by
modern minivan standards and speaking of
windows that don't open you might be
wondering how they design the windows on
the side of the van with that crazy line
down the front end the answer is there's
just giant triangular windows in the
front and again they don't open they're
just fixed in place these giant window
triangles that are very strange no other
car has these but the dust buster vans
do but anyway next we move into the
silhouette where there are quite a few
more quirks and features i'm going to
start with the airbags now this is a
1996 model the us government mandated
dual front airbags in
but many automakers added dual airbags
early both to protect their customers
and add some safety and reassurance to
their purchase now this van being both a
luxury vehicle and a family minivan you
would think would have gotten dual
airbags the moment they were created but
instead general motors waited until they
were legally required so you had a
driver airbag because that was mandated
in 1995
but on the passenger side you had a
storage cubby you could open it up and
put stuff in it and i hope you valued
that storage
more than your life because general
motors certainly did actually i have to
admit that storage was pretty nice to
have on the top of the dashboard where
the airbag would go because the glove
box really wasn't all that big and half
of it was taken up with the fuse panel
so you really didn't want some extra
storage in here and they gave it to you
instead of an airbag with that said this
was a family van so there were more
storage opportunities in here for
instance below the center control stack
you have this little bin that opens up
and that's a fairly large storage area
and on the ceiling there are several
different storage possibilities the
first one here has this button that was
for your garage door opener in the days
before homelink you would just put your
garage door opener in there and then you
would press the button and that would
press the button on your garage door
opener and your garage door would open
pretty simple now behind that you have
storage for sunglasses that's pretty
common most cars have that today and
behind that you have another little
storage area for i have no idea but it
does have this little nylon strap so
whatever you put in there won't roll
around or fall down when you open it up
now also on the ceiling over on the
driver's side you have an important
button and switch and that would be for
the power door the switch allows you to
enable or disable the power door if you
want it off and then the door can just
be treated like a manual door for safety
or other reasons you can do that here
the button here allows you to open the
power door so if you're in the driver's
seat you want to let in your child who's
outside press this button the door opens
and of course you can press that button
again and the door will close so you can
activate the power door from the
driver's seat now also on the ceiling
behind all these buttons in this storage
area you have some vents which is
unusual but yes these vents blow on you
from behind unlike in most cars where
all the climate control comes from in
front of you this one you have vents on
the back of your head another
interesting control area in this car be
the climate controls you can see it's in
this little square and speaking of
squares there are nine different squares
within the climate controls for you to
do various things there was no attempt
made to make this stylish or look nice
or integrated you just have squares in a
square and next up other weird controls
are found on the sides of the gauge
cluster over on the left side you have
the headlight controls you have two
buttons sticking off this area the top
one turns on the full headlights the
lower one turns on just the parking
lights and then inside this area you
have a little switch you can use to dim
or brighten the interior lights same
deal over on the right side of the gauge
cluster except here it's for the wipers
the button on top you can push for the
window washer and below that is the mist
button if you just want like one single
wipe and you're driving in mist next up
moving on to a warning light that lets
you know the tailgate is open you can
see it's shaped like the van not just
any van but the dust buster van and next
we move on to the back seat of this
silhouette where i am conveniently
already sitting i want to talk about
that door a couple of other interesting
items one is the fact that it's cable
driven and you can actually see the
cable if you look into the door jamb you
can see how the door kind of opens and
closes it's all attached to that cable
the other interesting thing is the
electrical contact you can see there are
like five different pins on the door and
they all line up to this electrical
contact piece on the pillar and i guess
that's how the car knows that the door
is actually closed when those five pins
are on that piece on the pillar now one
other item worth noting about the door
there's yet another way to open it in
here there's a little power door button
on the pillar next to the door you can
press that and it'll open and close the
door just like the button on the key fob
or the button next to the driver's seat
now when you climb in here you might be
wondering why the rear seats are
different colors this was not factory
stock the owner of this car told me when
he bought it they only had four seats
and he actually uses it as a family car
so he wanted to get the rest of the
seats but he looked everywhere and
couldn't find gray leather silhouette
seats so this is what he has instead
pretty simple now despite the fact that
the silhouette was billed as the
ultimate luxury minivan there weren't
really all that many frills back here
for the rear seats which was kind of the
whole point of buying a minivan in the
first place for carrying passengers you
had that child seat which i showed you
earlier and you have leather seats which
is pretty nice but aside from that you
were limited to basically these climate
control vents in the ceiling and there
was a set of climate controls over on
the driver's side of the rear area but
it wasn't full climate controls you
could only adjust the fan speed you
couldn't change the temperature all the
temperature changing was left to the
front seat occupants and next we move on
to the third row in the silhouette and
accessing the third row which is
actually surprisingly easy you just push
this latch and the whole seat comes
forward and then you have an easy path
to get into the third row there are a
lot of modern minivans and three row
suvs i get in where it isn't that simple
to get back here but once you're in the
third row you discover there are really
no frills back here nothing special
nothing nice nothing particularly
luxurious at this point it pretty much
just becomes transport when you're in
the third row and once you lift up the
tailgate you'll discover that something
particularly unusual back here just your
typical minivan cargo area not very
large but pretty standard with minivans
from this era probably the only really
unusual thing at least compared to
modern minivans is that this van doesn't
have fold flat seats that invention
didn't come out until like the 2000s and
that meant if you wanted a larger cargo
area you had to physically remove the
seats one at a time so the two in the
back and then three more in the middle
if you wanted the full cargo area open
for a larger item naturally this wasn't
very practical especially because once
the seats were out you had to have
somewhere to put them so if you were
taking the seats out unless you were at
home or in your garage you were just
leaving your seats behind full flat
seats were a rather important innovation
when they finally came out years after
this van went off the market and next up
back to the engine this was the general
motors 3400 v6 when the silhouette first
came out in 1990 it actually used the
3100 v6 which made only 120 horsepower
just abysmal over the years they added
more power they eventually put the 3800
v6 in this van with about 150 horsepower
and then this the 3400 is about 170 for
the final couple of model years but it
still wasn't really enough for a vehicle
this size and it really is pathetic by
modern standards our last interesting
silhouette item is this silhouette
brochure from 1996 nothing particularly
unusual in here but i love the back
color take a look at this 1996
oldsmobile lineup when was the last time
you saw any of these cars on the road in
nice shape they're all pretty much gone
but it's interesting to look at and
remember and so
those are the quirks and features of the
original oldsmobile silhouette now it's
time to get it out on the road and see
how it drives all right driving the
silhouette
i have always wanted to film a video on
this car as ridiculous as it may seem
um just because these gm dust buster
vans were kind of an icon looking out at
this windshield design i mean it's just
so bizarre the windshield is four feet
in front of me here it's just absolutely
crazy now on the road it actually drives
reasonably well um there's nothing
unusual about this and this car wasn't
intended to be really unusual it was
supposed to be a pretty rational normal
people mover vehicle that just happened
to have kind of weird styling to maybe
make the minivan seem a little bit less
uncool but unfortunately from behind the
wheel it's still an uncool minivan it
still drives every bit as uncool as
minivans do and basically what that
means is there's not much acceleration
that 3.4 liter v6 was totally
overmatched by the size of this vehicle
there's not much interesting here aside
from the stuff i already showed you with
a lot of the weird placement of things
and buttons and switches there's there's
nothing exciting about the driving
experience of this vehicle or even
really about sitting in this vehicle
except that you know you're in a weird
car ultimately it's pretty much just a
van but it was a van
that would have felt stylish and
luxurious back in 1996. actually that's
not entirely true the 1996 model year is
when chrysler introduced its like next
generation of van with dual sliding
doors and way more comfort and
convenience features and this thing
would have been totally outclassed by
1996 but it was a little bit innovative
with the power sliding door which is of
course now standard fare in minivans and
it's certainly interesting to film a
video with this bizarre and unusual
relic of the 1990s everybody remembers
the toyota previa because it had an
unusual powertrain it was supercharged
and all-wheel drive but to me this van
was always a little bit stranger it was
rarer it was luxury for some reason it
had some weird features and then of
course the styling and i always thought
the styling of this fan frankly was
weirder than that of the previa and so
that's the
1996 oldsmobile silhouette this is a
fantastic vehicle unless of course you
have taste
no i'm just kidding these were weird and
controversial but that was kind of the
point by the time these came out general
motors was so far behind the chrysler
minivan that they had to do something
interesting and crazy in order to stand
out
and as you can clearly see they
certainly stood out for better or worse
anyway now it's time to give the
original silhouette a doug score
starting with the weekend categories and
styling the silhouette is quite
unattractive and it gets a three out of
ten acceleration is very slow and it
gets a one out of ten handling is bad
not at all fun or sporty or quick or
connected and it gets a 2 out of 10. fun
factor is incredibly low there's not
really any fun to be had here and it
gets a 1 out of 10. finally cool factor
and i must admit these dustbuster vans
are starting to get sorta cool it gets a
4 out of 10 for a total weekend score of
11 out of 50.
next up are the daily categories and
features this van doesn't have any
modern tech but the power door and the
built-in child seat are big deals and it
gets a reasonably strong 4 out of 10.
comfort is average and it gets a 5 out
of 10. quality is poor the interior
isn't very nice and reliability is
mediocre and it gets a 4 out of 10.
practicality is excellent and it gets a
9 out of 10. finally value and these are
cheap and i mean really cheap and
they're sort of a cool thing to own for
a couple grand but they're also just not
very good it gets a 6 out of 10 for a
total daily score of 28 out of 50. added
up in the dug score is 39 out of 100
which places it here against some other
vans i've tested the silhouette's
closest rival i've tested is the toyota
previa the previa is better looking
better built and a bit more engaging to
drive but it can't match the
silhouette's power sliding door and
built-in child seat the silhouette is
after all the cadillac of minivans
[Music]